How to build and install ocelot
===============================

This package does not provide an automated way to install the libraries. After
building them, you need to copy by yourself the resulting files into
appropriate places.

Supported `make` targets are:

-  `all`: builds the libraries into the build directory. The directory has two
   sub-directories, one for header files and the other for static(`.a`) and
   shared objects(`.so`). Because of the memory library, two versions of `cbl`
   are generated with different names; `cbl` for production and `cbld` for
   debugging. Necessary headers are placed in the `build/include` directory.

-  `static`: same as `all` except that only static libraries (`.a`) are built
   into the build directory. Two versions of `cbl` are generated as explained.
   Necessary headers are placed in the `build/include` directory.

- `clean`: deletes all files generated while building the libraries.

Some libraries in `cbl` should be informed of the maximum alignment requirement
imposed by the execution environment. If the macro named `MEM_MAXALIGN` is not
defined, they try to guess the requirement. If the guess fails (and it often
does), a program that depends on them also might fail. In such a case, an
explicit value should be given by setting the `CFLAGS` variable as in:

    CFLAGS="-DMEM_MAXALIGN=8" make

If you are on a 64-bit environment with support for 32-bit emulations and want
32-bit builds of the libraries, add `-m32` to `CFLAGS` as in:

    CFLAGS="-m32 -DMEM_MAXALIGN=8" make

You can also build them as 64-bit binaries without `-m` flags. _Note that,
however, even if the build is successful, `ocelot` does not take full advantage
of 64-bit environments yet._

Some operations in the `dwa` library for double-word arithmetic perform much
more efficiently when built with `DWA_USE_W` defined if your machine has 8-bit
bytes and uses _little-endian_ byte order like
[x86](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86):

    CFLAGS="-DMEM_MAXALIGN=8 -DDWA_USE_W" make

After the libraries built, you can use them by linking and delivering with
your product, or install them on your system.


#### System-wide installation

You need to identify proper places to put the libraries (e.g., `/usr/local/lib`
in most cases, `/usr/local/lib32` for 32-bit builds on a 64-bit machine and
`/usr/local/lib64` for 64-bit builds) and headers (e.g., `/usr/local/include`),
and have permissions to place files there.

If you have installed a previous version of `ocelot`, you probably want to get
rid of that. For example, on my 64-bit [gentoo](https://www.gentoo.org)
machine, the following instructions run as _root_ uninstall any previous
installation of 32-bit builds of `ocelot`.

    rm -rf /usr/local/include/cbl /usr/local/include/cdsl /usr/local/include/cel
    rm /usr/local/lib/libcbl* /usr/local/lib/libcdsl* /usr/local/lib/libcel*

To install a new 32-bit builds with their headers, run these:

    cp -R build/include/* /usr/local/include/
    cp -d build/lib/* /usr/local/lib/
    ldconfig

where it is assumed that ld.so.conf has `/usr/local/lib` in it. `ocelot`'s
`Makefile` is configured to kindly create necessary soft-links to shared
objects, and the `-d` option to `cp` above preserves them.

Installed successfully, you can use the libraries by including necessary
headers in your code as in:

    #include <cbl/arena.h>    /* use arena */
    #include <cdsl/hash.h>    /* use hash */
    ...

and invoking your compiler with an option specifying the libraries to use, for
example:

    cc -m32 myprg.c -lcdsl -lcbl

Note that we are assuming 32-bit builds on a 64-bit machine, thus the `-m32`
option. The order in which libraries are given to the compiler is significant;
all of `cdsl` depend on `cbl`, which is the reason `-lcbl` follows `-lcdsl` in
the arguments for the compiler.


#### Local installation

You can copy or move built libraries and headers to whatever place you want,
and simply link them with your code as in:

    cc -I/path/to/headers -m32 myprg.c /path/to/libraries/libcel.a

This links a static library (thus, `.a`), which includes the library into the
resulting executable. Linking a shared library instead is also possible, but
not recommended because it requires the location of the linked library when
running the executable.
